The session cookie should not have an expiration date or max age so that it will be treated as a non
persistent cookie in the browser and it will be removed when a user closes the browser window or quits
it.
But each session definitely needs an expiration date to ensure it doesn't last too long.
You need to create your own two mechanisms in the back end of your site.
The first mechanism should invalidate this session after a specified time of inactivity.
You can do it with this simple code.
So first in your project settings defined the allowed time of inactivity, then on each request for
authenticated users, check if the last activity timestamp is not less than the current timestamp minus
these session expired time which we defined.
In other words, if the last activity was earlier than 30 minutes ago, ask the user to re authenticate
or for the logout process.
And if the inactivity was shorter than 30 minutes, the last activity timestamp is updated to the current
timestamp to give the user another 30 minutes.
But when we're only checking the time passed from the last user's activity we risk than an attacker
who stole decision ID would make some meaningless request on the constant basis just to keep the session
alive.
However, if you introduce an absolute expiration date and it passes, they will not be able to prolong
the session any further.
Of course, setting the expiry date and time in a cookie is a bad way to do that as it can be manipulated.
The check must be done on the server and the second mechanism you need to create.
And after the absolute expiration they passed the user, legitimate or malicious would need to re authenticate
to be able to continue the session.
And of course, the session should gain a new ID.
How long the absolute session lifetime should be needs to be calculated depending on the project and
its risk assessment.
In general, the longer the expiration period, the longer a potential attacker will be able to use
this session.
The shorter the expiry time, the more frequently users will need to re authenticate, which might be
frustrating and if not properly handled, any of their unsaved work might get discarded, which will
be even more frustrating.
Note that in many cases the attacker doesn't really need much time to do the damage, but in some cases,
after gaining unauthorized access to a session, they may need to wait to carry out their attack, which
can be held off by absolute expiration date and time.
To implement the absolute expiration time.
In the simplest way, you need to define the maximum session length.
In other words, each user will only be able to hold the session for this amount of time.
In our case, it's seven days.
After that, they will not be able to keep the session alive any further.
Next during login introduced another session variable which will hold the calculated absolute expiration
timestamp.
Then on each request perform a similar check as we did earlier for the inactivity period, but this
time compared the absolute expiration time stamp with current time.
And you don't update anything in session data here because the absolute expiration date and time must
always be set once during logging and remain unchanged.
That's the whole idea.
Both mechanisms for absolute and the relative session expiration turn out to be pretty easy from a technological
point of view, but they are tricky from usability perspective, and you should make it as smooth as
possible for legitimate users.
Otherwise they will easily get frustrated with their broken sessions.
The examples they give you improve security, but they're very basic and have poor usability.
The absolute expiration time is deadly for a session, so we definitely need to work on it a bit more.
First, it would be a good idea to display the expiration date and time in some visible place.
But let's be honest, not much.
People will pay attention.
So when the session is about to expire, it should be communicated to the user in some more explicit
way so that they would know they should re authenticate before starting any activity that could last
longer than the time until expiration.
In this example, we showed the alert one hour before the expiration time, but this can vary in case
of a simple form like money transfer.
We can assume the user might need maybe up to 5 minutes to complete the form, but in case of filling
in a complex form or writing an article in CMS, they might work on it much longer.
For example, an hour as in this example.
And better to inform the user too early than too late.
But the user could still work on something longer than you think to make sure the work doesn't get lost
when they finally hit the submit button.
You could further improve the mechanism, for example, by running an Ajax request every 5 minutes or
so, which could notify the server that the user is active on the site.
For example, typing in the form fields and monitor the absolute expiration time.
And when the session is really about to end, display an urgent alert instructing the user to save their
work and re authenticate.
WordPress handles that session expiration in a pretty nice way.
When the session ends, it displays the overlay with the log in panel so you can just type in your credentials
and continue with what you were working on.